Good morning everyone, my talk for today is about end-to-end mgt&ctrl for transport and access networks. 

My talk is in two parts, the first part presents an overview and challenges about end-to-end network management and the second part talks about relevant progresses in standardization groups mainly in IETF and BBF for unifiying the control and management of transport and access networks.

End-to-end management and control brings diverse network resources from different network segments under the same platform and allow these resources to be managed and coordinated in a uniform fashion. Automations of network operations can then be built on top of it which helps network operations to achieve the eventual goal of autonomous networking with capabilities like self-healing, self-optimizing and self-evolving with less human intervention.

Integration of networks with different technologies including transport and access has been a challenging work, because these networks are typcially managed as silos of managment domains with administrative boundaries and less software interfaces in between, and the networks themselves are complex in nature with multi-technologies, by multiple vendor systems, and networks are organized in multi-domain and multi-layer.

To address this challenge, new control architecture such as SDN with open interfaces are developed. SDN control provides the network with centralized intelligence and enables application such as big-data analytics for better network optimization. To achieve interoperability, SDN controllers use standard and open interfaces to interact with different vendor systems. And together with higher layer service orchestration system they can deliver and maintain services in a closed-loop automated fashion.

So here is a diagram of an end-to-end network topology from end user to the cloud. It includes customer premises network, access network, aggregation network and core network. The aggregation network can be built with multi-layer IP/Ethernet networks as well as OTN/L0 optical networks. Normal services that request flexible bandwidth and regular QoS can be routed over IP/ETH networks. business services or services that require high QoS such as low latency and deterministic performance can go over OTN or optical networks directly to the cloud. All these network segments need to work together to provide assured high-quality user experience. If the network domains are managed in silos, a lot of manual operations has to be done in between, which is really inefficient. To tackle with this problem, we use a hierarchical management and control architecture that consists of SDN controllers, orchestrator, and standard, open interfaces between them. For each network segment there is a domain controller which manages the underlying network through standard south bouth interfaces, and expose standard northbound interface to the E2E Orchestrator on the top. For example, the AN controller is used to management and control the underlay PON network which includes OLT, ODN and ONUs. The Aggregation ntwork controller is responsible to coordinate the management and control of differentiated services in both IP and OTN networks. The orchestrator cooperates with each domain controller this standard NBI and performs the resource and service orchestration functions.
Now lets put a focus on the access and aggregation networks and show what the hierarchical control looks like here. At the lowest level is the domain controller, which manages a single network domain, if there are multiple domains then there are multiple controllers and these controllers are further connected to another hierarchcal controller on the top, which is used to coordinate services across multiple domains including the access, IP and OTN domains. In real deployment the hierarchical controller as a logical function could be standalone with a cross-domain network service interface exposed to the end-to-end service orchestrator, or it could be integrated with the service orchestrator as shown in the picture, in which case the network service interface becomes an internal interface within the orchestrator. 
The hierarchical controller, or the orchestrator block uses open interface to talk to different domain controllers, and it appears that if the same set of interfaces are used, it will greatly reduce the complexity of the orchestrator to manage and end-to-end network from multiple vendors. Many standard organizations are working in this direction. For example, IETF proposed the ACTN control framework to provide a consistent interface across IP and transport, and under the BBF CloudCO initiative it is developing YANG-based data models for access network controller and a set of Common YANG models for managing the PON devices at the southbound.
With the hierarchical control that covers both access and transport, it enables the network to support closed-loop automation for service provisioning as well as network resource, as defined in the TMF automous network architecture. 

Next I will introduce relevant standardization work on the data modeling.

In IETF, the ACTN (Abstraction and Control of Traffic Engineering (TE) Networks) is defined in RFC8453 by the TEAS WG. The ACTN framework includes a set of management and control functions used to operate one or more TE networks, to construct virtual networks that can be presented to customers and that are built from abstractions of the underlying networks. 
ACTN defines a hierarchy controller architecture with three layers of controllers including the CNC (Customer Network Controller), the MDSC (Multi-Domain Service Coordinator) and the PNC (Provisioning Network Controller). A set of YANG data models is also defined in IETF, which can be used for both the MPI (MDSC-PNC Interface) and the CMI (CNC-MDSC Interface) interfaces in the ACTN architecture. 
ACTN can be used as the basic architecture for the control and management of the Optical Transport Network as well as IP networks. 

Since the scope of IETF ACTN is only IP and transport, to realize end-to-end services, extensions to support access network control need to be developed. If we have the same control architecture for access networks, then there needs a hierarchical controller and a domain controller for access networks, and it's natural to think that the hierarchical controller for access networks can be evolved to integrate with the MDSC to realize end-to-end hierarchical control. This work is driven in the BBF CloudCO being developed by the BBF SDN and NFV work area. Its goal is to re-architects the broadband network using SDN and Network Function Virtualization (NFV) towards a cloud infrastructure. and the framework is defined in TR-384 and TR-411. As you can see from the left IETF ACTN and the right BBF CloudCO, they are very similar in architecture with also three hierarchical control layer built with The CloudCO architecture defines also a domain orchestrator as well as a service orchestrator. The SBI of the ACTN corresponds to both the interface between the BAA and PON devices and the interface between the CCO-DO and BAA. And the NBI of the ACTN, the MPI, corresponds to the interface between SO and DO and between DO and the access SDN MCO. 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
In the access domain, 
The BBF CloudCO project is being developed by the BBF SDN and NFV Work Area to 
The reference architectural framework of the CloudCO is defined in TR-384. The CloudCO can be used as the basic architecture for control and management of the Optical Access Network. 

Page 9: BAA - broadband access abstractions
SBI point to the interface between CCO-DO (domain orchestrator) and BAA and BAA and device
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is worth noting that both models defined in BBF CloudCO and IETF ACTN models are sharing the same model base and definitions, which will help a lot with the end-to-end management and control scenario. The BBF Common YANG models for the SBI of domain controller is also sharing IETF base model definitions. 

This is an overview of the architecture and YANG data models being developed in IETF, mainly in the TEAS and CCAMP WGs. The ACTN models covers all L0-L3 networks including IP/MPLS, OTN, L0 WDM and MW. They are constructed as a few clustered model sets, including topology models, tunnel models, path computation, service models, and other models such as OAM and telemetry. These models are designed to be as compatible as possible with legacy distributed protocol-based control plane as well as with the centralized SDN control schemes. As you can see from the overall picture, most of the relevant YANG models are stable enough, are either in WG draft status as in those green boxes or as published RFCs as in those blue boxes.

The BBF CloudCO is also developing relevant data models for access networks. It defines the NBI interface SDN M&C and its functional requirements. TR-411 defines the cloudCO architecture, TR-413 defines SDN M&C interface and TR-454 defines the YANG data models for NBI. 
At the southbound, BBF is defining the abstracted device models in TR-451 for vOMCI, and OB-BAA for L2 device & service abstracted model. It also continues working on the common YANG model to advance the device models for managing physical or virtual network functions within the network.
 
So, when both access and transport are placed under the same end-to-end management and control architecture with the help of hierarchical control and open interfaces, it makes it possible to realize interesting application across the network. For example, network slicing is a hot topic and is one of the core features in 5G scenarios, which requires end-to-end slicing capabilities in bear networks. In this case, IETF is defining a generic network slicing framework and YANG data models to support 5G slicing. Technology-specific slicing models such as OTN slicing is also developed in the CCAMP WG. These model can be provided at the northbound of the hierarchical controller, and each domain, including access, IP and OTN will have its on slice controller, which are using the same base slice models to stich different slices together to form an end-to-end managed slice. 
BBF is also defining slicing at the NBI with in CloudCO and also at the SBI with the concept of FAN sharing defined in WT-370 and WT-386. It defines two types of slices, resource-slice which means both the physical resources and logical resources such as MAC address pool can be sliced to serve different tenants. A management slice defines a slice based on the level of authorities for different tenants. Both types of slices augment from the same model base and the right side picture shows the augmentation relationship. For more details I'd suggest interested readers to take a look at WT-370 and WT-386.

So here is the summary, ...read them out. 

Thank you.



